you want to invest in the stock but have
no idea whether or not now is a good
time to buy sure you've heard the
age-old buy low sell high but what does
that really mean when does the stock's
price considered low $10 a share $100
there's no perfect answer to these
questions but there are ways to at least
gauge how expensive or achievement stock
is you see by using something called a
multiple we can figure out how much
we're paying for stocks underlying
business and if this price has changed
over time interested we'll dive into the
topic and more on today's plain bagel
you may have noticed that when you
google search a stock like well Google
for example you end up with a series of
search results as well as some basic
details about the ticker in there you
have your stocks open price market
capitalization and dividend yield but
also lists something called the p/e
ratio of the company the p/e is an
example of what's called a multiple a
ratio that compares a stock's price to
some fundamental number generally
speaking the higher the multiple the
more expensive a stock is considered
think that as like a price per pound at
a butcher shop in shopping for pork beef
or chicken it's difficult to compare the
total prices since the quantity you get
is different for each cut but if you
look at the price per pound you can
easily figure out which cut is the best
bang for your buck multiples work in a
similar way allowing us to compare the
price of a stock to the underlying
fundamentals you get with the purchase
now there are hundreds of different
multiples that investors can use
including the evie to a bita price to
book value big setter etcetera some of
the multiples are industry specific
whereas others are more broad in nature
and each carries a different implication
but the p/e ratio which stands for the
price to earnings ratio is one of the
most straightforward and popular it's
easy enough to calculate since you take
the stock's price and divide it by the
company's earnings per share for example
if plain bagel Co had 1 million shares
outstanding each of which we're trading
out of price of $30 and last year their
net income was 2 million dollars the
stock's p/e ratio would be 15 times this
p/e ratio is known as a trailing p/e
because we're calculating it using
historical information and it's one of
the easiest multiples to understand it
basically represents how much an
investor is willing to pay per dollar of
company's profits so for plain bagel Co
we are paying a price equal to 15 times
our share of the company's profit so the
trailing p/e helps conceptualize how
much we're paying for a stock but it
does have its shortcomings the biggest
one being that it is backwards looking
whereas many believe that markets are
forward-looking if a company is expected
to release a new product enter a new
market or improve its operations in the
future then a stock will likely trade
higher something that the trail
he wouldn't take into account using past
earnings to explain this Sox current
price because of this many investors
prefer instead to use what's known as a
forward multiple in this case the
forward p/e which divides a stock's
price by how much the company is
expected to make next year for example
let's say that plain bagel Co is
expected to launch a new bagel product
next year and as a result analysts are
expecting earnings to increase to 2.5
million dollars next year in this case
assuming everything else remains
unchanged plain bagel COEs forward p/e
multiple would equal 12 times now the
clear problem with for multiples is that
they rely on forecasts which may not pan
out but they can still help gauge the
value of a stock and how much investors
are paying up for a company's potential
profit so for a play megacode our
forward looking p/e is 12 times great
but what does that mean well by itself
not a whole lot you see multiples are
relative measure sure understanding how
long it will take for your stock to pay
for itself is useful but to understand
whether the level is attractive or not
we've got to compare it to other
multiples we could for example compare
the p/e ratio to plain bagel COEs
historical p/e ratios to see how it has
changed over time this will give us an
idea of whether investors are valuing
the company higher lower than normal if
the company's earnings are expected to
increase but the price of the stock has
fallen it would mean that the multiple
has contracted and investors don't value
the profitability of the firm as much as
they used to
alternatively if earnings are falling
but the prices risen well the multiple
has expanded meaning people are paying
more for less profit we could also
compare the p/e multiple to the stock's
long-term average to see whether the
margin is larger or smaller than normal
if the stocks ten-year average p/e is 15
times for example we can assume that the
stock's multiple is temporarily cheaper
than normal and may warn to buy if we
pick up the stock in the multiple later
expands back to its long term average
then we could earn a return even if that
company's earnings are flat a key
assumption here is that a multiple is
expected to revert to its mean over time
and while that doesn't always hold true
investors sometimes look for extreme
variations from the mean with many
believing that short-term volatility in
the stock small
which could be caused by a bad press
release or negative near-term headwind
will eventually subside causing the
multiple to return to its normal level
assuming a company's core business
remains unchanged awesome so if I find a
company that's trading out of multiple
below its historical average I'm good to
buy right well not quite sure
understanding where the company's stock
value stands relative to its past is
great but you need to compare the value
to other stocks as well in the same
industry in our analogy if you found
pork on sale for $6 a pound they may
still be too expensive if a butcher down
the road is offering pork for a regular
price of $2.50 a pound
similarly if we need to gauge the value
of a stock relative to its peers so
let's take plain bagel Co and compare to
sesame sands and the Hangul bagel which
are trading at for PE s of 13 times and
7 times respectively if you compare
plain bagel COEs 12 times multiple to
its pier average of 10 times well then
we can see that the stock is actually
more expensive than other bagel
companies on average all right so the
stock is cheaper than it normally is but
more expensive than its peers so should
I buy or sell or what well as great as
it would be to have a one number basis
for making investment decisions it's
simply not that simple multiples are
limited in the amount of insight they
provide with a p/e multiple for example
we are taking into account the company's
growth rate sure compared to peers plain
bagel COEs p/e of 12 times may seem
expensive but a plain bagel Co is also
growing its earnings at a faster pace
the multiple may be justified this is
why high growth companies like those in
the tech space tend to have higher
multiples than stocks and slower moving
areas like utilities on the other side
of the spectrum just because a company
is trading at a p/e below its peers or
even below its historical average
doesn't mean it's a good buy the
multiple compression could be justified
if the company's fundamentals have
deteriorated what do I mean by that well
let's go back to our analogy imagine
you're at the butcher shop and you see
two steaks trading at $10 a pound and $3
a pound
looking for some value you pick up the
$3 cut but when you get home you find
that the steak you bought has expired
and that it's a lower quality cut
you're not even sure if it's actually a
beef anymore so aside from learning that
there's probably something wrong with
three dollar steak what's the lesson
here
well just because something is cheap
doesn't mean you should buy it a lower
stocks p/e may reflect a justified
devaluation of the company maybe for the
plain bagel ko keto diets are expected
to kill the bagel industry or maybe the
companies facing regulation that will
prevent it from making its staple plain
bagel these are things that would hurt
plain bagel COEs future profitability
and even though the multiple would
contract it doesn't make the company and
goodbye because the company's core long
term prospects have deteriorated that's
the thing about multiples they are
pretty meaningless without context and
chasing low multiples without an
understanding of a company's core
business and future prospects may leave
you it was something called a value trap
a stock that looks cheap compared to its
historical crisis but continues to fall
even further because of a deterioration
in the firm's fundamentals so why
discuss multiples if they could mean
that a stock is both over and
undervalued well it's not that multiples
are useless they are a handy way to
quickly understand a stock's price level
but as I said at the beginning they are
a rough gauge of a stock's value at best
some investors even contest that the p/e
multiple is incredibly limited because
of its use of accounting earnings
numbers which may be easily altered by
management assumptions and non-cash
items
so while multiples can certainly help
you make investment decisions we need to
ensure that your decision itself is
based on a thorough understanding of a
firm's operations and its future
prospects not just the stocks multiple a
good approach is to find companies you
like based on their fundamentals and
then find some appropriate multiple to
understand the firm's valuation after
the fact looking for cheap stocks first
mainly be with a portfolio of low
quality holdings after all as warren
buffett says it's far better to buy a
wonderful company at a fair price than a
fair company at a wonderful price so
next time you find a stock trading at a
low multiple or a stake selling at three
dollars a pound
make sure to check the fundamentals and
the stakes expiration and that the steak
is actually steak but with that said
we're out of time if you like this video
please hit the like button and if you
like we're doing here please
subscribe hit the bell icon to make sure
you get notifications about future
videos if you have any feedback or
topics you'd like us to cover in future
videos leave a comment down below for
the plain bagel my name is Richard
coffin thanks for joining me today
[Music]